I have been developing software professionally for just over nine years. I have also held exactly nine different jobs in these nine years, including my current position. Looking back, there are plenty of ways of grouping them. The good ones and the bad ones. The fun ones and the boring ones. The challenging ones and the breezy ones. The one I wish I hadn’t left so early on, the one I wish I hadn’t stayed in as long.  The ones in which I loved my team, and the ones in which I didn’t. One distinction I would like to write about today is: the ones in which I paired, and the ones in which I did not.

You might already know what pair programming is. It’s one of the disciplines in the eXtreme Programming set of practices, one of the staples of modern agile teams, along with test-driven development, trunk-based development and continuous integration/deployment.

Pairing is, to put it shortly, two people sharing a workstation to work on a task, either physically by using multiple peripherals, or remotely through screen sharing or IDE tools. When we speak of pair programming we speak of doing it as your default way of working, not just when you’re stuck. Some benefits of pairing are immediately clear and well documented:
- You spread knowledge around until each member of your team is capable of working on any task;
- The mental burden of complex tasks is shared, so engineers don’t get stuck nearly as often;
- Two pairs of eyes are catching mistakes and potential issues before they ever cause trouble.

Having alternated between teams that pair and teams that don’t, the advantages have become even more obvious. Here are a few more nuanced advantages I have grown aware of:

- Pairing equalizes the skillsets of the engineers involved, in real time. Whether it’s the technical stack, architecture, understanding of the domain, problem-solving, or any of the myriad skills that make up a good engineer, everyone is going to have their strengths and weaknesses. Maybe you’re great at naming things and you write really expressive code. Maybe you can’t write a regular expression to save your life, or you constantly mess up your git commands. Pairing with someone means you are joining your skillset with somebody else’s and getting the best bits from each. You’ll even find that different styles complement each other more often than not. A good pair is like the 10x programmer that legends speak of.

- If you pair during most of your workday, you don’t have to go out of your way to improve your skills. You are improving them through interaction, passively absorbing your pair’s skills while leveling up your own as you are teaching someone else about the things you’re good at. You can be a teacher and a student at the same time while you solve problems collaboratively, rather than browsing the internet for solutions while you’re stuck trying to do something you learned five years ago.

- Communication skills. Coding all by your lonesome can be hindering your language skills. This is normal — your brain is doing math using its own mental model of the problem, so words are not always necessary. Sometimes your thought process will feel untranslateable, like you are some kind of mad genius at work. This is harmful to the team, as you might be creating code that only you will understand — code that will rot and cause problems when you move teams. Constant pairing fixes this, as you are forced to find words to translate your thought process, bridging the gap between the math within and the humans around. You’ll get better at expressing yourself to other devs and non-devs — in meetings, in writing, in public speaking, in interviews, maybe even when getting a coffee with someone you like.

- When I moved to full time remote work, working on my own became depressing. After staring at code for hours and not uttering a word, I could barely pass for a human being in my team’s virtual watercooler meetings or stand-ups. I did not feel connected to them, which made it harder to empathise and stay motivated. Having left that job for a full-time pairing job, everything changed. Sharing a task with someone in real time and chatting about the weather while you wait for the build to finish, syncing your coffee breaks with somebody else, confessing that you feel like crap because you stayed up late binge watching something; that’s not just mentally healthier — it’s more productive. It keeps your social gauge filled, so you can be a normal-functioning person even if you’ve spent the last two years working in your pijamas.

Right now, it's hard to imagine that I will ever return to a non-pairing environment. The advantages are just too many. I still enjoy coding solo but I'd much rather leave that for my personal projects.